# 2025-08-28 - HLSL Working Group Minutes

> Propose a discussion topic by making an edit suggestion on the GitHub PR.

* Discussion topics
  * Feature availablity for DXIL/SPIRV optional features 
    * Maybe we should have a generalized approach that works for both DXIL optional features and SPIRV profiles and extensions.
    * Seems like general feeling is this would be an improvement over how DXC currently does things.
    * Action item: Chris B to write up a draft design to iterate with Steven on.
  * Quick updates:
    * A new Qualcomm Snapdragon X builder is coming online for the offload test suite.
    * Justin is aiming to have a PR up by the end of the week for constant buffer work.
    * Helena is reworking resource constructors and aims to get that in before Steven's work on resource counters.
    * Farzon noted that we will need SPIRV backend legalization for vectors larger than 4 elements because some optimizations generate them.