# 2025-07-31 - HLSL Working Group Minutes

> Propose a discussion topic by making an edit suggestion on the GitHub PR.

* Discussion topics
  * Supporting -O0 in Clang
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>