# 2025-08-21 - HLSL Working Group Minutes

> Propose a discussion topic by making an edit suggestion on the GitHub PR.

* Discussion topics
  * CBuffer status.
  * Design for simple matrix use status.
  * Tracking Bugs vs Unimplemented Features in offload test suite
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>