# 2025-07-10 - HLSL Working Group Minutes


* Discussion topics
  * Issue tracking / project management process (#312)
    * Chris started and Damyan completed an overview of Damyan's document: https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/blob/main/docs/issue_tracking.md
    * If there are any questions please reach out.
    * Chris suggested we should maybe have a future discussion topic on getting additional reporting out of the offload-test-suite for status of in-progress features.
  * Resource binding assignments for SPIR-V: https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/pull/309
    * Defers assigning implcit bindings to after optimization. This aligns closer with the DXIL support, but is different from DXC's SPIRV.
    * DXC is inconsistent about where implicit counter buffers are bound depending on the type of resource. This proposal is for LLVM to be consistent, which is a behavior change.
    * There was also a tangential discussion about diagnostics for implicit bindings. Some ideas included diagnosing any implicit binding, or diagnosing any mix of implicit and explicit bindings. These are probably worth pursuing separately.
    * Action Item: @llvm-beanz to reach out to users of the DXC SPIRV support
  * Shader semantics implementation: https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/pull/296
    * We have not yet had time to review the latest updates, but this is continuing to progress.
    * We will try to make progress on this asynchronously before the next meeting.
    * Action Item: Chris will carry this onto the agenda for next week's meeting to ensure that we follow-up if any issues remain.
