---
title: 2025-09-11 - HLSL Working Group Minutes
---

> Propose a discussion topic by making an edit suggestion on the GitHub PR.

* Discussion topics
  * Discuss matrix types in interface variable. Cbuffer and semantics.
  * Discuss about semantics
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>
