# 2025-07-17 - HLSL Working Group Minutes

> Propose a discussion topic by making an edit suggestion on the GitHub PR.

* Discussion topics
  * Shader semantics implementation: https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/pull/296
  * Root Signature driver options in clang: https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/pull/320
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>