---
title: 2025-10-16 - HLSL Working Group Minutes
---

* Discussion topics
  * @bogner provided status on the cbuffer work - the frontend parts are stable at this point and he'll be putting up PRs for review. The work is unfortunately difficult to split into smaller pieces
  * There is still need for review on @keenuts's semantics PRs. @tex3d will circle back to those.
