---
title: 2025-11-13 - HLSL Working Group Minutes
---

* Discussion topics
  * [Maximal reconvergence tests](https://github.com/llvm/offload-test-suite/pull/473)
    * One test is sensitive to wave size, the other is likely a clang bug
      * Chris: We should fix the Clang issues by using the LLVM convergence token intrinsics in both DXIL and SPIRV code generation
      * Steven: We should coordinate as we work though issues so we don't end up looking at the same problems 
    * Action Item: likely to remove subgroup_uniform_control_flow and add more convergence tests in the future.
  * CBuffer explicit padding PR is up: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/167404
    * PR is up. Reviews are appreciated.
  * Push constants
    * Nathan is adding an address space for the SPIRV handling of push constants
    * This seems fine and won't interfere with DX at all
  * Meeting concluded after 17 minutes