---
title: 2025-07-17 - HLSL Working Group Minutes
---

* Discussion topics
  * Shader semantics implementation: https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/pull/296
    * @tex3d and @Keenuts discussed the documentation of HLSL semantic annotations.
      * @tex3d mentioned the need to document DXC's behavior including how system values are organized.
      * Action Item to @Keenuts to expand documentation on DXC's behavior
    * @tex3d mentioned that the current implementation needs to be revised to handle additional use cases and complexity.
    * @Keenuts has a branch supporting input, output and user semantics in progress.
  * Root Signature driver options in clang: https://github.com/llvm/wg-hlsl/pull/320
    * @inbelic walked through his proposal for bringing over driver options from DXC to Clang-DXC.
    * Some of the options are very straightforward, like `-force-rootsig-ver`. Others are more complicated.
    * There was a discussion of how and when root signature validation occurs in Clang and DXC.
      * @bogner: I think being consistent with whatever we do for that makes sense.
      * @bogner: ...in DXC, all of this stuff happens late. I think in Clang, we have to be a little bit more deliberate about some of these things because the things that are done in like the AST and Sema.
    * `Qstrip_rootsignature` fairly common and widely used, and we will need to support it
    * `setrootsignature` is also used when attaching separately compiled root signatures
      * @tex3d suggested container manipulation in a separate tool similar to dxa in DXC.
      * @llvm-beanz suggested adding support in objcopy which would align with idomatic practices in LLVM and Clang
      * Driver options could be implemented in terms of an external tool for compatability and made more efficient later if performance is a problem.
    * @tex3d noted that the `verifyrootsignature` validates the shader bindings against the root signature. This option is essential for ensuring the validity of the root signature and shader combination
    * The `Frs` option was also discussed.
      * @bogner suggested adding this as a driver action to post-process the output file
    * Action Item to @inbelic: Create a scenario for `objcopy` support to handle container manipulation support.
  * Scalarizer pass generating invalid DXIL: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/149345
    * Agreement seems to be that this is a bug in the scalarizer pass which needs investigation.
  * Lowering of structs to DXIL: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/147109
    * Did not get to this topic, will be carried over to next week.
  * <placeholder topic>
  * <placeholder topic>