# 2025-08-07 - HLSL Working Group Minutes

> Propose a discussion topic by making an edit suggestion on the GitHub PR.

Notes:

* @bogner is working on cbuffer layouts, still in progress
* AMD and NV GPUs now up in the offload-test-suite
  * @Icohedron is filing issues to track all the failures we're seeing on AMD and NV GPUs. All failures are parented here: https://github.com/llvm/offload-test-suite/issues/317
* @Keenuts has a PR up for Semantics parsing: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/152537
* No other discussion topics.