---
title: 2026-05-21 - HLSL Working Group Minutes
---

## Discussion Topics

* Test suite usage outside of HLSL in clang development
* Discuss whether helper scripts that track test statuses or track build runner
  activity belong in the offload test suite repo.

## Meeting Notes

### Test Suite Usage

We considered the possibility of leveraging the HLSL offload test suite for
filling testing gaps with DXC, and in particular for validating DXC releases
for use in the Vulkan SDK.

* While expanding the test suite to cover more drivers is something we support,
  this idea is to use the existing stuff, not necessarily drive adding
  anything.
* There are some questions on whether the test suite is sufficient for that use
  case, given that it's been focused on driving our own development.
* No real objections to using the test suite in this way - it certainly doesn't
  sound like it would harm its primary use.

### Helper Scripts in Offload Suite

We discussed whether adding helper scripts to the test suite is in scope for
the repo, and what the bar is for adding some. In particular, should we add
scripts that make it easier to analyze CI status and results?

* Generally whether such scripts are useful should be judged on their own
  merits and through code review.
* Tools to make analysis of CI easier feel like they're in scope for the repo.
* We should add these scripts to `utils/`, mirroring LLVM. Putting scripts in
  the `.github` subdirectory had objections due to being harder to discover.
* If scripts bitrot or stop being useful, we can remove them.

### Question About DirectX vs SPIR-V Priority

A question was brought up on whether the development of HLSL in clang puts
higher priority on DirectX vs SPIR-V or if they're at the same priority.

* Different contributors have different priorities, but the intent is for the
  full feature set to be implemented for both.
